==== TEMPLATE ====
A SPATIO -TEMPORAL  DEEP  LEARNING  APPROACH 
FOR DEEPFAKE DETECTION  
 
PHASE  I REPORT  
 
Submitted  by 
V SHARMILA  
Register  No: 953424405004  
 
 
in partial  fulfilment  for the award  of the degree  of 
MASTER  OF ENGINEERING 
IN 
COMPUTER  SCIENCE  AND  ENGINEERING  
 
 
V V COLLEGE  OF ENGINEERING  
 
DEPARTMENT  OF COMPUTER  SCIENCE  AND 
ENGINEERING  
 
ANNA  UNIVERSITY  : CHENNAI  600 025 
 
NOVEMBER  2025  

BONAFIDE  CERTIFICATE  
 
Certified  that this Report  titled  “A SPATIO -TEMPORAL  DEEP 
LEARNING  APPROACH  FOR  DEEPFAKE  DETECTION”  is the Bonafide  
work of Ms. V SHARMILA (Register No. 953424405004) who carried out the 
project  work  under  my supervision.  Certified  further  that to the best of my knowledge 
the work  reported  here in does not form  part of any other  thesis  or dissertation  on the 
basis  of which  a degree  or award  was conferred  on an earlier  occasion  on this or any 
other candidate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature  of the HOD   
Dr.R. Jensi M.E., Ph.D.,  
HEAD  OF THE  DEPARTMENT  
Computer  Science  and 
Engineering,  
V V College of Engineering,  
Tisaiyanvilai -628656. Signature  of the Supervisor   
MS. D. Merlin Gethsy M.E.,  
SUPERVISOR, AP/CSE  
Computer  Science  and 
Engineering,  
V V College of Engineering, 
Tisaiyanvilai -628 656.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted  for phase -I project  and viva-voce  examination  held on………………  
 
 
 
 
 
Internal  Examiner  External  Examiner  

==== FORENSICS ====
AltFreezing for More General Video Face Forgery Detection
Zhendong Wang1,*Jianmin Bao2,*Wengang Zhou1,3,†Weilun Wang1Houqiang Li1,3,†
1CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2Microsoft Research Asia
3Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{zhendongwang,wwlustc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jianbao@microsoft.com, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Existing face forgery detection models try to discriminate
fake images by detecting only spatial artifacts ( e.g., gener-
ative artifacts, blending) or mainly temporal artifacts ( e.g.,
flickering, discontinuity). They may experience significant
performance degradation when facing out-domain artifacts.
In this paper, we propose to capture both spatial and tempo-
ral artifacts in one model for face forgery detection. A simple
idea is to leverage a spatiotemporal model (3D ConvNet).
However, we find that it may easily rely on one type of arti-
fact and ignore the other. To address this issue, we present a
novel training strategy called AltFreezing for more general
face forgery detection. The AltFreezing aims to encourage
the model to detect both spatial and temporal artifacts. It
divides the weights of a spatiotemporal network into two
groups: spatial-related and temporal-related. Then the two
groups of weights are alternately frozen during the training
process so that the model can learn spatial and temporal
features to distinguish real or fake videos. Furthermore, we
introduce various video-level data augmentation methods to
improve the generalization capability of the forgery detec-
tion model. Extensive experiments show that our framework
outperforms existing methods in terms of generalization to
unseen manipulations and datasets.
1. Introduction
With the recent rapid development of face generation
and manipulation techniques [30, 31, 45 –49, 56], it has be-
come very easy to modify and manipulate the identities or
attributes given a face video. This brings many important
and impressive applications for movie-making, funny video
generation, and so on. However, these techniques can also be
abused for malicious purposes, creating serious crisis of trust
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding authors.
Temporal conv
Spatial conv
!+
Temporal conv
!
Spatial conv+Figure 1. Illustration of AltFreezing training strategy in a build-
ing block of the spatiotemporal network. The convolutional ker-
nels of the spatiotemporal network are divided into two groups:
temporal-based andspatial-based . Two groups of weights are
alternately frozen during training. With the help of the alternate
freezing ( AltFreezing ) strategy, our model can capture both spatial
and temporal artifacts to distinguish between fake and real videos.
and security in our society. Therefore, how to detect video
face forgeries has become a hot research topic recently.
To date, one successful line of research [10, 32, 34, 39,
42, 44, 50] tries to discriminate fake images by detecting
“spatial” artifacts in the generated images ( e.g., checkboard,
unnaturalness, and characteristic artifacts underlying the
generative model). While these methods achieve impressive
results in searching spatial-related artifacts, they ignore the
temporal coherence of a video and fail to capture “temporal”
artifacts like flicking and discontinuity in the video face
forgeries. Some recent works [25,43,54] notice this issue and
try to address it by leveraging temporal clues. Although they
achieve encouraging results in detecting unnatural artifacts
at the temporal level, the resulting models are not sufficiently
capable of finding spatial-related artifacts.
In this paper, we attempt to capture both spatial and tem-
poral artifacts for general video face forgery detection. Gen-
erally, a well-trained spatiotemporal network (3D ConvNet)
has the capability of searching both spatial and temporal
artifacts. However, we find that naïve training may cause
it to easily rely on spatial artifacts while ignoring temporal
artifacts to make a decision, causing a poor generalization
This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
4129


capability. This is because spatial artifacts are usually more
obvious than temporal incoherence, naïvely optimizing a
3D convolutional network makes it easily rely on spatial
artifacts.
So the question is how to enable the spatiotemporal net-
work to capture both spatial and temporal artifacts. To this
end, we propose a novel training strategy called AltFreez-
ing. As shown in Fig. 1, the key idea is to alternately freeze
spatial- and temporal-related weights during training. Specif-
ically, a spatiotemporal network [9] is built upon 3D res-
blocks, which consist of spatial convolution with kernel size
as1×Kh×Kwand temporal convolution with kernel size
asKt×1×1. These spatial and temporal convolutional ker-
nels are responsible for capturing spatial- and temporal-level
features, respectively. Our AltFreezing strategy encourages
the two groups of weights to be updated alternately so that
both spatial and temporal artifacts can be conquered.
Furthermore, we propose a set of video-level fake video
argumentation methods for generating fake videos for train-
ing. These methods could be divided into two groups. The
first is fake clips that only involve temporal artifacts wherein
we just randomly drop and repeat frames for real clips. The
second is clips with only spatial artifacts that are obtained
by blending a region from one real clip to another real clip.
These augmentation methods are the first to take the tempo-
ral dimension into consideration and generate spatial-only
and temporal-only fake videos. With these augmentations,
the spatiotemporal model is further encouraged to capture
both spatial and temporal artifacts.
Equipped with the above-mentioned two techniques, we
achieve state-of-the-art performance in various challenging
face forgery detection scenarios, including generalization
capability to unseen forgeries, and robustness to various
perturbations. We also provide a comprehensive analysis
of our method to verify the effectiveness of our proposed
framework.
Our main contributions are three-fold as follows.
•We propose to explore both spatial and temporal arti-
facts for video face forgery detection. To achieve this, a
novel training strategy called AltFreezing is proposed.
•We introduce video-level fake data augmentation meth-
ods to encourage the model to capture a more general
representation of different types of forgeries.
•Extensive experiments on five benchmark datasets in-
cluding both cross-manipulation and cross-dataset eval-
uations demonstrate that the proposed method sets new
state-of-the-art performance.
2. Related Work
In the past few years, face forgery detection has been an
emerging research area with the fast development of genera-tive models and manipulation techniques. In this section, we
briefly revisit the development of face forgery detection.
2.1. Image Face Forgery Detection
Earlier face forgery detection methods [4, 8, 10, 22, 26, 41,
50] mainly focus on spatial artifacts of manipulated images,
and directly train a binary classifier based on CNN or MLP
as the detector. Later Rossler et al. [42] suggest that an
unconstrained Xception [11] network can achieve an impres-
sive performance. some works pay more attention to special
types of artifacts, such as frequency [28,29,37,40], blending
artifacts [20, 32, 44], resolution difference [35], and so on.
Moreover, there are some works [7,14,24,27,39,51] aiming
to localize the forged regions and make a decision based on
the predicted regions. A more recent work ICT [17, 18] tries
to leverage identity information for detecting face forgeries.
2.2. Video Face Forgery Detection
Recent works [6, 13, 16, 25, 33, 38, 43] start to take tempo-
ral cues into consideration for face forgery detection. CNN-
GRU [43] employs a GRU module after CNN to introduce
the temporal information. In [6,16], a 3D ConvNet is directly
trained to detect spatial and temporal artifacts. Some stud-
ies introduce prior knowledge to benefit video face forgery
detection, such as eye blinking [33], lip motion [25], and
emotion [38]. Amerini et al . [6] suggest that predicting
optical flow between frames helps deepfake detection.
There are A part of works [19, 21, 54] which tend to fo-
cus on representation learning. STIL [21] considers both
the spatial and temporal inconsistency and designs a spatio-
temporal inconsistency Learning framework for deepfake
video detection. RealForensics [19] introduces audio infor-
mation and leverages self-supervised learning for represen-
tation learning. A recent work FTCN [54] explores directly
training a fully temporal 3D ConvNets with an attached
temporal Transformer. However, detecting without spatial
information may harm the generalization capability. In this
work, we aim to bring both spatial and temporal features for
more general face forgery detection.
2.3. Generalization to Unseen Manipulations
With the rapid development of face generation and ma-
nipulation techniques, many previous face forgery detection
methods [10, 42, 50] cannot well address unseen manipula-
tions and datasets. Recent studies have noticed this chal-
lenge and focus on improving the generalization capabil-
ity of the model. FWA [35] targets the artifacts in affine
face warping as the distinctive feature to detect the forgery.
Face X-ray [32] proposes that detecting blending bound-
aries in images can make a general detector, which sets up
a new paradigm of synthesizing images for generalizable
face forgery detection. SBI [44] inherits the detecting bound-
aries thought proposed by Face X-ray [32] and suggests that
4130


==== EYEBLINK ====
Exposing DeepFake Videos By Detecting Face Warping Artifacts
Yuezun Li, Siwei Lyu
Computer Science Department
University at Albany, State University of New York, USA
Abstract
In this work, we describe a new deep learning based
method that can effectively distinguish AI-generated fake
videos (referred to as DeepFake videos hereafter) from real
videos. Our method is based on the observations that cur-
rent DeepFake algorithm can only generate images of lim-
ited resolutions, which need to be further warped to match
the original faces in the source video. Such transforms leave
distinctive artifacts in the resulting DeepFake videos, and
we show that they can be effectively captured by convo-
lutional neural networks (CNNs). Compared to previous
methods which use a large amount of real and DeepFake
generated images to train CNN classiﬁer, our method does
not need DeepFake generated images as negative training
examples since we target the artifacts in afﬁne face warp-
ing as the distinctive feature to distinguish real and fake
images. The advantages of our method are two-fold: (1)
Such artifacts can be simulated directly using simple image
processing operations on a image to make it as negative ex-
ample. Since training a DeepFake model to generate nega-
tive examples is time-consuming and resource-demanding,
our method saves a plenty of time and resources in training
data collection; (2) Since such artifacts are general existed
in DeepFake videos from different sources, our method is
more robust compared to others. Our method is evaluated
on two sets of DeepFake video datasets for its effectiveness
in practice.
1. Introduction
The increasing sophistication of mobile camera technol-
ogy and the ever-growing reach of social media and media
sharing portals have made the creation and propagation of
digital videos more convenient than ever before. Until re-
cently, the number of fake videos and their degrees of re-
alism have been limited by the lack of sophisticated edit-
ing tools, the high demand on domain expertise, and the
complex and time-consuming process involved. However,
the time of fabrication and manipulation of videos has de-
creased signiﬁcantly in recent years, thanks to the acces-sibility to large-volume training data and high-throughput
computing power, but more to the growth of machine learn-
ing and computer vision techniques that eliminate the need
for manual editing steps.
In particular, a new vein of AI-based fake video gen-
eration methods known as DeepFake has attracted a lot
of attention recently. It takes as input a video of a spe-
ciﬁc individual (’target’), and outputs another video with
the target’s faces replaced with those of another individ-
ual (’source’). The backbone of DeepFake are deep neu-
ral networks trained on face images to automatically map
the facial expressions of the source to the target. With
proper post-processing, the resulting videos can achieve a
high level of realism.
In this paper, we describe a new deep learning based
method that can effectively distinguish DeepFake videos
from the real ones. Our method is based on a property of
the DeepFake videos: due to limitation of computation re-
sources and production time, the DeepFake algorithm can
only synthesize face images of a ﬁxed size, and they must
undergo an afﬁne warping to match the conﬁguration of the
source’s face. This warping leaves distinct artifacts due to
the resolution inconsistency between warped face area and
surrounding context. As such, this artifacts can be used to
detect DeepFake Videos.
Our method detects such artifacts by comparing the gen-
erated face areas and their surrounding regions with a ded-
icated Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model. To
train the CNN model, we simplify the process by simu-
lating the resolution inconsistency in afﬁne face warpings
directly. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst detect faces and then extract
landmarks to compute the transform matrices to align the
faces to a standard conﬁguration. We apply Gaussian blur-
ring to the aligned face, which is then afﬁne warped back to
original image using the inverse of the estimated transfor-
mation matrix. In order to simulate more different resolu-
tion cases of afﬁne warped face, we align faces into multiple
scales to increase the data diversity (see Figure 2). Com-
pared to training a DeepFake model to generate fake im-
ages as negative data in [ 1,10], which is time-consuming
and resource-demanding ( ∼72hours on a NVIDIA GTX
1
46


GPU), our method creates negative data only using simple
image processing operations which therefore saves a plenty
of time and computing resources. Moreover, other meth-
ods may be over-ﬁt to a speciﬁc distribution of DeepFake
videos, our method is more robust since such artifacts are
general in different sources of DeepFake videos. Based
on our collected real face images from Internet and corre-
sponding created negative data, we train four CNN mod-
els: VGG16 [ 31], ResNet50, ResNet101 and ResNet152
[11]. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on
a DeepFake dataset from [ 20] and test several fake videos
onYouTube .
2. Related works
AI-based Video Synthesis Algorithms The new genera-
tion of AI-based video synthesis algorithms are based on
the recent developments in new deep learning models, es-
pecially the generative adversarial networks (GANs) [ 9]. A
GAN model consists of two deep neural networks trained in
tandem. The generator network aims to produce images that
cannot be distinguished from the training real images, while
the discriminator network aims to tell them apart. When
training completes, the generator is used to synthesize im-
ages with realistic appearance.
The GAN model inspired many subsequent works for
image synthesis, such as [ 8,28,2,13,32,30,21,36,3,5].
Liuet al. [21] proposed an unsupervised image to image
translation framework based on coupled GANs, which aims
to learn the joint representation of images in different do-
mains. This algorithm is the basis for the DeepFake algo-
rithm.
The creation of a DeepFake video starts with an input
video of a speciﬁc individual (’target’), and generates an-
other video with the target’s faces replaced with that of an-
other individual (’source’), based on a GAN model trained
to translate between the faces of the target and the source,
see Figure 1. More recently, Zhu et al. [36] proposed cycle-
consistent loss to push the performance of GAN, namely
Cycle-GAN. Bansal et al. [3] stepped further and pro-
posed Recycle-GAN, which incorporated temporal infor-
mation and spatial cues with conditional generative adver-
sarial networks. StarGAN [ 5] learned the mapping across
multiple domains only using a single generator and discrim-
inator.
Resampling Detection . The artifacts introduced by the
DeepFake production pipeline is in essence due to afﬁne
transforms to the synthesized face. In the literature of dig-
ital media forensics, detecting transforms or the underly-
ing resampling algorithm has been extensively studied, e.g.,
[25,26,22,15,16,17,7,24,27,12,4]. However, the
performance of these methods are affected by the post-
processing steps, such as image/video compression, whichare not subject to simple modeling. Besides, these methods
usually aim to estimate the exact resampling operation from
whole images, but for our purpose, a simpler solution can
be obtained by just comparing regions of potentially synthe-
sized faces and the rest of the image – the latter are expected
to be free of such artifacts while the existence of such arti-
facts in the former is a telltale cue for the video being a
DeepFake.
GAN Generated Image/Video Detection . Traditional
forgery can be detected using methods such as [ 35,6]. Zhou
et al. [35] proposed two-stream CNN for face tampering de-
tection. NoisePrint [ 6] employed CNN model to trace de-
vice ﬁngerprints for forgery detection. Recently, detecting
GAN generated images or videos has also made progress.
Liet al. [20] observed that DeepFake faces lack realistic
eye blinking, as training images obtained over the Inter-
net usually do not include photographs with the subject’s
eyes closed. The lack of eye blinking is detected with a
CNN/RNN model to expose DeepFake videos. However,
this detection can be circumvented by purposely incorpo-
rating images with closed eyes in training. Yang et al. [34]
utilized the inconsistency in head pose to detect fake videos.
The work [ 19] exploited the color disparity between GAN
generated images and real images in non-RGB color spaces
to classify them. The work [ 23] also analyzed the color dif-
ference between GAN images and real images. However,
it is not clear if this method is extensible to inspecting lo-
cal regions as in the case of DeepFake. Afchar et al. [1]
trained a convolutional neural networks namely MesoNet
to directly classify real faces and fake faces generated by
DeepFake and Face2face [ 33]. The work [ 10] extended [ 1]
to temporal domain by incorporating RNN on CNN. While
it shows promising performance, this holistic approach has
its drawback. In particular, it requires both real and fake
images as training data, and generating the fake images us-
ing the AI-based synthesis algorithms is less efﬁcient than
the simple mechanism for training data generation in our
method.
3. Methods
We detect synthesized videos by exploiting the face
warping artifacts resulted from the DeepFake production
pipeline. For efﬁcient running time, the current DeepFake
algorithms create synthesized face images of ﬁxed sizes.
These faces are then undergone an afﬁne transform ( i.e.,
scaling, rotation and shearing) to match the poses of the
target faces that they will replace (see Figure 1(g) – (h)).
As such, the facial region and surrounding regions in the
original image/video frame will present artifacts, the reso-
lution inconsistency due to such transforms after the subse-
quent compression step to generate the ﬁnal image or video
frames. Therefore, we propose to use a Convolutional Neu-
ral Network (CNN) model to detect the presence of such
47


==== AUDIO ====
HOLA: Enhancing Audio-visual Deepfake Detection via
Hierarchical Contextual Aggregations and Efficient Pre-training
Xuecheng Wu†
wuxc3@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, ChinaDanlei Huang†
forsummer@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, ChinaHeli Sun*‡
hlsun@xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China
Xinyi Yin†
yinxinyi@stu.zzu.edu.cn
Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou, ChinaYifan Wang
wangyfan@mail.ustc.edu.cn
University of Science and Technology
of China
Hefei, ChinaHao Wang
haowangx@xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China
Jia Zhang
zhang_jia@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, ChinaFei Wang
fei_wang@mail.dlut.edu.cn
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, ChinaPeihao Guo
3121132005@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China
Suyu Xing
xingsuyu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, ChinaJunxiao Xue‡
xuejx@zhejianglab.cn
Zhejiang Lab
Hangzhou, ChinaLiang He
lhe@xjtu.edu.cn
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China
ABSTRACT
Advances in Generative AI have made video-level deepfake detec-
tion increasingly challenging, exposing the limitations of current
detection techniques. In this paper, we present HOLA, our solution
to the Video-Level Deepfake Detection track of 2025 1M-Deepfakes
Detection Challenge. Inspired by the success of large-scale pre-
training in the general domain, we first scale audio-visual self-
supervised pre-training in the multimodal video-level deepfake
detection, which leverages our self-built dataset of 1.81M samples,
thereby leading to a unified two-stage framework. To be specific,
HOLA features an iterative-aware cross-modal learning module
for selective audio-visual interactions, hierarchical contextual mod-
eling with gated aggregations under the local-global perspective,
and a pyramid-like refiner for scale-aware cross-grained semantic
enhancements. Moreover, we propose the pseudo supervised singal
injection strategy to further boost model performance. Extensive
experiments across expert models and MLLMs impressivly demon-
strate the effectiveness of our proposed HOLA. We also conduct
a series of ablation studies to explore the crucial design factors
of our introduced components. Remarkably, our HOLA ranks 1st,
outperforming the second by 0.0476 AUC on the TestA set.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MM ’25, October 27-October 31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
©2025 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/25/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXXCCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Scene understanding ;•Infor-
mation systems→Multimedia information systems .
KEYWORDS
Deepfake detection, Audio-visual learning, Self-supervised pre-
training, Multimodal fusion
ACM Reference Format:
Xuecheng Wu†, Danlei Huang†, Heli Sun*‡, Xinyi Yin†, Yifan Wang, Hao
Wang, Jia Zhang, Fei Wang, Peihao Guo, Suyu Xing, Junxiao Xue ‡, and Liang
He. 2025. HOLA: Enhancing Audio-visual Deepfake Detection via Hierar-
chical Contextual Aggregations and Efficient Pre-training. In Proceedings
of 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia (MM ’25). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 INTRODUCTION
Generative AI technologies present new opportunities for creating
immersive content in various multimedia fields, including VR, cine-
matic production, and communications. However, their misuse can
contribute to the rise of deepfake-related issues, leading to serious
social security risks such as online fraud, defamation, and fake
news. As a result, developing effective deepfake detection systems
is crucial to ensure the reliability of multimedia applications.
In light of this, the 2025 1M-Deepfakes Detection Challenge
has brought promising advancements in building powerful and
robust deepfake detection systems. The new AV-Deepfake1M++
dataset [ 6], built upon the AV-Deepfake1M dataset [ 5], contains
∗Corresponding author.
†Equal contributions.
‡Equal advice.arXiv:2507.22781v1  [cs.CV]  30 Jul 2025

MM ’25, October 27-October 31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Wu et al.
over 2M samples and thousands of speakers. Regarding its construc-
tion procedure, AV-Deepfake1M++ is generated by modifying audio
information through word-level deletion ,insertion , and replacement
cross-grained manipulations, and then aligning fine-grained ele-
ments such as lip movements and facial actions with the generated
audio and corresponding visual content [ 5,7]. The impressive ex-
pansion in both quality and quantity presents new challenges for
current SOTA deepfake detectors, particularly in capturing audio-
visual correlations in the deepfake contexts. In this work, we focus
on Track 1, i.e., Video-Level Deepfake Detection, where the task
goal is to determine whether a given audio-visual sample, contain-
ing a single speaker, is a deepfake or a real video.
Given the above challenges, expert visual-only deepfake detec-
tors [ 13,30,44] or visual-language models (VLMs) [ 22,47,54] often
fail to adequately capture the complex deepfake cues embedded in
the audio modality. Therefore, we naturally decide to approach the
issues from the perspective of audio-visual joint modeling, primar-
ily focusing our design efforts on the aggregations of cross-modal
correlations. Most of the existing cross-modal deepfake detection
methods [ 9,46,52] typically rely on a limited-scale dataset for spe-
cialized design, which often results in models that cannot learn
sufficiently generalizable deepfake-related representations, thereby
failing to fully unleash the potential of advanced architectures. In
the general vision and language domains, large-scale pre-training
with scaling properties, followed by fine-tuning on downstream
tasks such as multimodal emotion analysis [ 12,48,49] and action
recognition [ 36], has successfully leveraged the full potential of
advanced model designs, leading to significant performance.
Inspired by such tremendous success, this work proposes a two-
stage joint learning framework termed HOLA (Fig. 1) for video-level
deepfake detection. Specifically, during pre-training, we follow the
design of [ 40,48] to construct transformer-based encoders for both
audio-visual modalities. We then plainly design an audio-visual
fusion module consisting of the attention-based components to
capture the correlated information. Additionally, we introduce the
audio-visual dual masking strategy to balance the performance and
training costs with an acceptable drops. Building upon this, we con-
struct a massive dataset consisting of 1.81M samples sourced from
the speaker recognition datasets [ 11,53] to support scalable pre-
training, thereby establishing a solid foundation for downstream
deepfake detection. During deepfake fine-tuning, leveraging the
audio-visual encoders which learn generalized facial representa-
tions, we design three distinct components from the hierarchical
contextual perspective to fully aggregate cross-modal correlations
for capturing deepfake cues. First, we propose an iterative-aware
cross-modal learning module to perform selective interactions,
thereby suppressing intra-modal redundancies and enhancing com-
plementary forgery cues. Based on the enhanced features, we then
develop a local-global contextual fusion module with gated aggre-
gations to achieve a comprehensive capture of both local tampering
artifacts and global semantic inconsistencies. Finally, we introduce a
pyramid-like refiner to perform scale-aware cross-grained semantic
enhancements, which is coupled with a classifier to output the final
predictions. Moreover, we introduce a pseudo-supervised signal
injection strategy, which boosts the fine-tuning scale by extracting
the absolutely confident samples from each iteration, leading to
further performance gains. Extensive experimental results acrossAV-Deepfake1M++ [ 6] subsets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
HOLA. Moreover, we evaluate the performance of advanced VLMs
in this scenario to further validate the superiority of our expert
model. We also perform ablation studies to explore the critical de-
sign factors of our proposed components. Notably, we achieve the
first place in this video-level deepfake detection track, outperform-
ing the second place by 0.0476 AUC on the TestA set.
In addition to advancing deepfake detection, our HOLA can
also inspire advancements in audio-visual scene understanding and
omni-modal language models [ 16,28]. In summary, our main con-
tributions are three-fold: (i). We efficiently perform data scaling
in learning general facial representations for audio-visual deep-
fake detection, constructing 1.81M pre-training samples, thereby
establishing a two-stage training paradigm for impressive perfor-
mance. (ii). We propose the iterative-aware cross-modal learning
module, local-global contextual fusion module, and pyramid-like
refiner to perform hierarchical contextual aggregations, facilitat-
ing the capture of deepfake-related cues. (iii). We introduce the
pseudo-supervised signal injection strategy to globally enhance
performance. Extensive experiments across AV-Deepfake1M++ sub-
sets demonstrate the effectiveness of our HOLA. A series of ablation
studies are also conducted to explore the key factors of our design.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Deepfake Detection Datasets
Existing deepfake detection datasets can be generally classified into
unimodal and multimodal ones. Unimodal datasets are predomi-
nantly composed of visual modality, for instance, FaceForensics++
[37] provides over 1.8M images extracted from 1,000 real and manip-
ulated videos. Celeb-DF [ 23] comprises 590 real and 5,639 forged
videos of celebrities. Deepfake-Synthetic-20K [ 39] offers 20,000
high-resolution synthetic face images generated using StyleGAN-
2 [19]. Multimodal datasets typically contain two or more modalities
among images, videos, and audio, making them suitable for cross-
modal deepfake detection research. FakeAVCeleb [ 20] contains 500
real videos and 19,500 fake videos. ForgeryNet [ 17] includes 2.9M
images and 221,247 videos, covering 7 image-level and 8 video-level
forgery techniques. DF40 [ 51] encompasses 40 deepfake generation
techniques, featuring over 0.1M forged video clips and more than
1M fake images. DDL [ 29] offers over 1.8M fake samples across
image, video, and audio modalities. The dataset used in this work,
AV-Deepfake1M++ [ 6], is the currently largeset audio-visual multi-
modal deepfake detection dataset comprising over 2M high-quality
video clips and covering over 2,000 speakers.
2.2 Deepfake Detection Methods
Existing approaches in deepfake detection can be categorized into
visual-based and multimodal ones. Specifically, visual-based meth-
ods can be further divided into image-level and video-level de-
tection. Image-level detection relies on digital forensics and the
identification of visual artifacts. Lugstein et al. [ 27] introduce PRNU
from the forensics domain into deepfake detection. Detectify [ 15]
combines ELA with CNNs for robust detection. Zhao et al. [ 55]
regard this detection task as fine-grained classification and design
a multi-attention model. Nguyen et al. [ 31] propose a localized arti-
fact attention network under the multi-task manner. Video-level

==== HYBRID ====
Received 30 March 2025, accepted 24 April 2025, date of publication 30 April 2025, date of current version 12 May 2025.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2025.3566008
A Hybrid Deep Learning Framework for Deepfake
Detection Using Temporal and Spatial Features
FAZEEL ZAFAR
1, TALHA AHMED KHAN
2, SALAS AKBAR1, MUHAMMAD TALHA UBAID
3,
SAMEENA JAVAID
1, AND KUSHSAIRY ABDUL KADIR
4, (Senior Member, IEEE)
1Department of Computer Sciences, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Bahria University, Karachi Campus, Karachi 75290, Pakistan
2Cybersecurity and Technological Convergence (CTC) Section, Malaysian Institute of Information Technology, Universiti Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur 53100,
Malaysia
3Department of Information Technology, University of Central Punjab, Lahore 54000, Pakistan
4British Malaysian Institute, Universiti Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur 53100, Malaysia
Corresponding authors: Talha Ahmed Khan (talha@unikl.edu.my) and Kushsairy Abdul Kadir (kushsairy@unikl.edu.my)
This work was supported by the Universiti Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
ABSTRACT The rise of deep-fake technology has sparked concerns as it blurs the distinction between fake
media by harnessing Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). This has raised issues surrounding privacy
and security in the realm. This has led to a decrease in trust during online interactions; thus, emphasizing
the importance of creating reliable methods for detection purposes. Our research introduces a model for
detecting deepfakes by utilizing an Enhanced EfficientNet B0 structure in conjunction with Temporal
Convolutional Neural Networks (TempCNNs). This approach aims to tackle the challenges presented
by the evolving sophistication of deep-fake techniques. The system dissects video inputs into frames to
extract features comprehensively by using Multi Test Convolutional Networks (MTCNN). This method
ensures face detection and alignment by focusing on facial regions. To enhance the model’s adaptability,
to different scenarios and datasets we implement data augmentation techniques such as CutMix, MixUp and
Random Erasing. These strategies help the model maintain its strength, against distortions found in deepfake
content. The backbone of EfficientNet B0 utilizes Mobile Inverted Bottleneck Convolutions (MBConv)
and Squeeze and Excitation (SE ) blocks to enhance feature extraction by adjusting channels to highlight
details effectively. A Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) facilitates the fusion of scale features capturing
intricate details as well, as broader context. When tested on the FFIW 10 K dataset, which comprises 10,000
videos evenly split between manipulated content, the model attained a training accuracy of 91.5 % and a
testing accuracy of 92.45 %, after 40 epochs. The findings showcase the model’s proficiency, in identifying
videos with precision and tackling the issue of class imbalances found in datasets – a valuable contribution,
to advancing dependable deepfake detection solutions. Furthermore, the model achieves an impressive
balance between accuracy and computational efficiency, attaining 92.45% testing accuracy with a lightweight
computational cost of 0.45 GFLOPs, making it a highly practical choice for real-world deployment.
INDEX TERMS Deepfake detection, face detection and alignment, EfficientNet B0, temporal convolutional
networks (TCNs), multi-task convolutional neural network (MTCNN), feature pyramid network (FPN),
mobile inverted bottleneck convolutions (MBConv).
I. INTRODUCTION
As technology has significantly advanced in recent years,
the challenges related to these advancements have also
risen substantially in various fields. Among all other fields
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Zahid Akhtar
 .Deepfake is one of the major concern these days as deep-
fake has put a question over the legitimacy of the media
and information security. Deepfake uses namely Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1], to generate hyper realistic
synthesized/simulated media. Because of this artificial fabri-
cation of digital content, establishing the difference between
real and synthesized data has become significantly difficult.
79560
2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ VOLUME 13, 2025

F. Zafar et al.: Hybrid Deep Learning Framework for Deepfake Detection
These exaggeration in generation of fabricated media, both
videos and images, have raised a major concern about media
validity and its effect on societal norms, as deepfake gen-
eration may lead to procreation of false and misleading
information as well as the loss of societal faith over dig-
ital content [2]. The advancements in GANs models and
availability of larger datasets have helped in generation of
remarkably realistic digital media that goes undetected by
human eye, but as these models work on spatial and tem-
poral fabrications, these fabrications can be detected using
advanced techniques of deep learning models [3]. These con-
cerning advancements in generation of false media demands
for the establishment of advanced and effective deepfake
detection algorithms. To overcome the challenges of deepfake
detection, researchers has opted more advanced deep learn-
ing approaches that can detect spatiotemporal fabrications
of media content more accurately [3]. Efficient Net belongs
to the family of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
that handles width, depth and resolution of the network to
attain maximum accuracy. It is one of the many technologies
being implemented for detection of deepfake media content,
as Efficient Net uses far less computational cost then other
techniques [4], making it one of the potential technique to
detect fabricated media as it has capacity to extract precise
information from images and videos. The advancement in
production of concerning accurate fabricated media has pre-
sented us with a challenge far greater than just spatial domain,
lack of temporal coherence in these fabricated images/videos
is a very crucial aspect to be addressed. In recent years Tem-
poral Neural Networks (TempCNNs) have become one of the
main technique to handle sequential data. They offer signif-
icant advantage over Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) as
TempCNNs maintains the relation between temporal scales in
hierarchical manner [5]. When TempCNNs and Efficient Net
are combined together they can provide a technique that can
analyze spatiotemporal intricacies of deepfake media more
accurately. In this paper, an integrated approach of Efficient
Net and TempCNNs is proposed for deepfake detection,
where Efficient Net is responsible for spatial feature extrac-
tion and TempCNNs for pattern recognition. By making most
of the strength, proposed by both architectures this research
aims for a better approach for detection real media from
fake media. Given the increasing sophistication of deepfake
generation techniques, there is a growing need for solu-
tions that not only achieve high detection accuracy but also
maintain computational efficiency. Traditional methods often
sacrifice real-world applicability due to high computational
costs. Our approach, however, presents a balanced trade-off,
ensuring that high accuracy can be achieved without exces-
sive resource consumption, making it a more viable solution
for practical, real-world deployment.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
The field of deepfake detection and related computer vision
applications has seen significant advancements in recent
years, with various models and techniques being developedto improve accuracy and efficiency. The literature in this
domain highlights the evolution of approaches, datasets,
and performance metrics, demonstrating how research has
progressively tackled the challenges posed by deep-fake
technology.
Deepfake detection has leveraged Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) and hybrid models to achieve high detec-
tion accuracy. A 2024 study utilized Inception Net in a
CNN-based comparative analysis, trained on a Kaggle dataset
comprising 401 videos and 3,745 images post-augmentation,
achieving an accuracy of 92.3% with moderate computational
efficiency [6]. Similarly, a 2023 study applied Support Vector
Machines (SVM) with Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
on a custom dataset, transforming RGB images to YCbCr,
leading to a 92.8% accuracy when using PCA, compared
to 72.2% without PCA [8]. A 2025 study further enhanced
face forgery detection by introducing attention-based fea-
ture learning and Optimized Long Short-Term Memory
(OLSTM). Using datasets such as FaceForensics++, Deep-
fake Detection Challenge, Celebrity Deepfake, and Wild
Deepfake, this approach achieved a cross-validated accu-
racy of 94.65%, albeit at a lower efficiency due to its
reliance on OLSTM and ResNet-50 Multi-Head Attention
(RN50MHA) [9].
Recent comparative analyses have shed light on the
performance of various deepfake detection architectures.
In 2024, researchers compared CNN+RNN, Deepfake
Detection Network (DAFDN), Hybrid Inception ResNet v2,
and Xception models on a comprehensive dataset. The
study reported accuracy rates of 94.8% for CNN+RNN,
97.8% for DAFDN, and 98% for the Hybrid model, with
efficiency varying based on computational demands [11].
Similarly, a 2022 study assessed multiple deepfake detec-
tion algorithms on FaceForensics++, reporting an accuracy
of 96%, indicating that efficiency trade-offs are a key factor
in model selection [20]. Further, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) have played a crucial role in image syn-
thesis and deep-fake generation. A 2020 review of GAN
variants in computer vision examined datasets such as
LSUN-BEDROOM, CELEBA-HQ-128, and CIFAR-10,
reporting a precision of over 90% for BigGAN, though
computational costs were noted as a challenge [7]. Like-
wise, a 2018 study implemented Enhanced Super-Resolution
Generative Adversarial Networks (ESRGAN) using Residual
Dense Blocks (RDDB) without Batch Normalization (BN)
layers. Despite achieving an RMSE score of 15.15% on the
PIRM self-validation dataset, the model’s high complexity
made it less efficient [10].
On the other hand, Alternative deepfake detection meth-
ods have incorporated diverse techniques. A 2022 study
employed MesoNet on FaceForensics++ and Celeb-DF,
yielding an 88% accuracy while maintaining high efficiency
due to its lightweight nature [13]. Another 2022 study focused
on Point of Interest (POI) action detection using Multi-task
Cascaded Convolutional Networks (MTCNN) and MesoNet
on a customized dataset of Barack Obama, achieving an
VOLUME 13, 2025 79561
